# Game Philosophy and FAQ

## Philosophy

While there are many existing formats of Magic: The Gathering, each of them prioritizes a different style of deckbuilding and play. However, while themed deck building around is very popular in formats like Commander, there are no formats that prioritize typal themes. Typically, these themed decks suffer from either being underpowered compared to the competition or having to run many off-theme cards just to function. The goal of this format is to restrict *and* reward themed deckbuilding around creature types. 

Many design decisions have resulted from this theming-forward approach. The choice of legendary creature should be a signature feature of the deck, so unlike Commander, its removal is less of a setback. 60 cards with 4x creatures allowed pushes theming to the forefront of gameplay. And the coalition victory is a cheeky nod to the Commander-banned Coalition Victory card, but is an important way of making even vanilla creatures capable of giving a gameplay advantage. Furthermore, rewarding players who use their legendary creature to deal damage encourages pusing towards the coalition victory condition, but also provides a distinct benefit-- the pseudo-explore/Curiousity effect of revealing the top card and being able to draw it or ramp for Typal spells distinctly favors decks that maximize Typal deckbuilding.

All of these designs have wide ranging effects on gameplay, and one notable feature of the format is that it is fast and chaotic. A player may very well be able to win consistently by turn 3 or 4, and another player lacking defenses or answers will only speed this up. But the goal here is to allow focused decks to compete in a terrain that is chaotic by nature of being multiplayer. Even the same decks played in the exact same manner may quickly lead to different outcomes. To this end, being able to play multiple games quickly, in combination with a sideboard, should allow players to have fun playing their decks without the frustration of being caught dead in the water or eliminated early in a long game. Beyond those format mechanics, Commander's Rule 0 is considered in effect! Discuss with players what your deck or playstyle is bringing to the table, and ensure everyone is able to have fun.

As a format, there are essentially two important criteria to meet: is it fun to build decks for, and is it fun to play. The first criteria is heavily priotized here. Players frequently have favored creature types and enjoy building around those. The 60 card limit, combined with allowing 4x of creatures, gives a strong foundation to quickly iterate on when thinking of decks. And ensuring the legendary creature means its abilities can be designed around wihtout fear of being constantly shut down. To this end, 4x lands are allowed because it reduces the friction on deckbuilding. Of course none of this matters if a deck isn't fun to play. But the chaotic nature of multiplayer, combined with quick games, sideboarding, and rule 0, means that most players should get a chance to have fun with their constructions, even if they don't end up winning. 


## FAQ

### Why ban fast mana and tutors?
There are two reasons for these restrictions. First, this format can already be extremely fast and chaotic; adding in fast mana or tutors would enable some truly absurd plays that other players would get no chance to respond to. Second, one notable feature in some other formats is that the inconsistency of getting these cards in an opening hand can lead to a sense of unfairness, where that player lucked into the advantage that other players want. That frustration is, overall, understandable and worth minimizing.

### Why not allow other legendary cards?
The choice of legendary creature should really be something special, not just another card in the deck that you happen to have easy access to. To that end, removing other legendary cards helps increase its significance. And furthermore, access to any other legendary cards would dramatically change the power of decks, likely reducing the viability of the themed creature and increasing the importance of non-Typal legendary spells like planewalkers and artifacts. That change would make the format's power levels harder to regulate while also reducing the typal aesthetic, a lose-lose for everyone.
